Okay. So the fighting was over. Well, the fighting
was substantially over. The German army had
effectively collapsed by that time. Essentially
mop up operations going from where we were on the
west bank of the Rhine right on clear up into
Yugoslavia and then the unit got sent back to the
United States and actually got sent to Camp Swift,
Texas, a backdrop.
So that was a shortcoming, just messing around, no
excuse for getting wounded in the way I did. It
would have been nice to finish out the war. Yes, I
guess it would.
In retrospect, I don't know whether that would
have been unlucky or lucky as it was.
There's so many people qualified
and of course you never know
what one day difference at one time or another
would have made. It's just that close.
Retirement is a major change in an individual's
life. Did you retire because of the age? I went on
mandatory retirement for time and grade. One is
allowed five years in grade or a certain number of
years for
that grade. But my mandatory retirement was
effective because I was five years in the great
Brigadier General.
At the time, I was one of those being considered for
a major general assignment commander of the 75th
Maneuver Area Command in Houston.
And I guess there was some disappointment that I
wasn't selected for that. But actually I had mixed
emotions about it because I had real heavy demands
on my civilian job too. Very few general officers
live five minutes from their headquarters. in the
Army Reserve, so I could accomplish this work with
a very minimum of time. And one time previously,
I'd turned down an opportunity to be assigned to a
general officer position as deputy commander of
the 90th Division Artillery, because I didn't
feel like I had the time to do it. There again, it was
just a lucky decision. because the one who was
assigned to that position got promoted to
Brigadier General, but then his job was, when the
whole division was deactivated, he didn't have a
job, so he didn't serve in the job for about one
year. So if I'd taken that assignment, I would have
had to go to Dallas, Texas to meet with the unit.
That would have taken a good deal more time.
Probably would have detracted from my
effectiveness in my civilian job. I wouldn't have
had the position. I probably would have earned a
star alright, but I wouldn't have had the position
very long. I was just lucky that I didn't take that.
So the job down in Houston was a major generalship?
Yes. And what would you have been doing now?
command the 75th maneuver area command, which is
really only about 350 people down there. So it's
basically a smaller command than much ahead, but a
higher rank. Much smaller command, much higher
rank, but the responsibilities of the unit are
great. It's just a big headquarters unit that is
prepared to command a maneuver area on
mobilization and carried out similar
responsibilities on an active duty and active
duty for training basis. Do you remember what your
thoughts were on the day that you retired? Oh, I was
happy with my career. Had no regrets at all. Plenty
of things to do on weekends. Proud of the people,
proud of the status of the unit the way I left it.
Very proud of the man that had been selected to
succeed me. I had campaigned for him. That's
Colonel McIntosh.
I'd selected and tried to bring him along, put him
in position. For every general officer position,
of course, any eligible colonel can apply for it.
So here was my deputy right there that we had really
a game plan for succession to command of that unit
over about five years in the future. That got
telescoped quite a bit because Carl McIntosh
succeeded me and within a year he was Deputy Chief
Army Reserves in Washington, a position I feel
like I might have had a little bit of influence in
helping him get. And then the man we had picked to
succeed McIntosh got to succeed him in just a
little over a year, and that was Colonel Len
Stewart, a man I had helped to develop
a highly talented person, real able. I was proud to
be present at the ceremony where he got his star.
That would be gratifying. Oh, the whole thing was
just a pleasant trip to me and I really had no
regrets on retirement. Well, let's talk about
leadership then. It's about our final topic.
Could you define leadership?
Well, leadership is a status
which one achieves
by
selection
and earns
by of course having followers. fundamental that
if one is a leader, you must have followers.
Though it is a status that may be earned by
designation or selection by higher leaders or
higher authorities, or it can be just given to a
person on a volunteer basis by a group of people.
Now, you've been a leader in both civilian and in
the military. Is there a difference?
Basically, I don't think there is. I think the same
traits for success exist in both places. You know,
it's popularized quite often in films to see
military leaders like Patton, you know, sort of,
come on, over the hill boys, let's go and kick them
in the back of the pants. That kind of, That idea, do
you think that that type of leader is very typical
of the armed forces? Not as much anymore. It is a
very effective form of leadership, very
authoritarian, dominant kind of leadership. But
the
followers don't, in general, react to that, I
believe, readily as they once did. We have a higher
educated group of people that are
rather sophisticated and knowledgeable and
different psychology, different expectations.
I don't believe that you can, they're not blind
followers that one might expect to respond best to
that style of leadership.
Most people that tried, the way I'm saying it,
would fail in that kind of leadership. Patton was
notably successful.
I would say that Paul Bryant, as a football coach,
is that type of man. why it is that they're able to be
so effective with that style of leadership.
Certainly it isn't my style. What is your style of
leadership?
I've explained it to
my faculty and to my leaders in the Army this way.
have often said that one time I read an article in a
wildlife magazine, where the leading sentence in
the article was, you can drive a buffalo anywhere
he wants to go. And I believe that's what you can do
with professional people and good subordinate
leaders in an army. You can help them achieve
whatever it is they really want to achieve.
My style of leadership is to try to give them enough
recognition, encouragement, responsibility so
that they will want to achieve and try to help them
do that.
Support of them. Well certainly, create
opportunity and really, I've often told the
successful people that I never expected them to do
anything except a little bit more than they were
doing right now. So I always wanted them to be
ambitious and want to achieve just a little bit
more. Give them recognition for it. Be frank with
them about my perception of what their status was,
I think. We must be frank and honest and open about
those things. Okay. So, so far you've mentioned
honesty, being frank, being encouraging. These
to me seem to be values you think leaders should
have. Are there other values that leaders should
have? Well, I certainly believe that a leader must
set the example. I don't believe he can demand
anything of those for whom he has responsibility
that he wouldn't do himself. That
he has to be willing to work just a little bit harder
than those under him to achieve. So I don't believe
he can demand anything of the people for whom he has
responsibility that he wouldn't do himself. I
don't believe you can get anybody to do as I say, not
as I do. So
that's one other attribute that I think is very
important. I think it is very important that the
people receive adequate recognition for what
they do. That they believe that what they do is
important. I wanted to them to take pride in it. I
want to have pride and I want them to be proud. Self
satisfying. Achievement. It seems to me that
you're the type of leader that opens paths for
people so they can use their open ways for people so
they can use their own potentials. Would you agree
with that? I don't want to put words in your mouth. I
try to
The greatest responsibility a leader has, for
instance, one who is department head or whatever,
is the selection of the people that will be on his
team. And we have a lot of opportunity for that. A
person to have success must be a good judge of the
characteristics of the people that he can choose.
They must have a lot of potential. He must get a lot
of satisfaction out of seeing them develop their
potential and keep providing opportunity and
stimulus to them.
Is tolerance or flexibility, are those important
for a leader? Well, for some leaders, tolerance is
important, but tolerance can also be a fault. I'm
sure George Patton was mighty intolerant. He had
very high standards and he certainly expected
people to come up with those standards or else.
So I think that a leader can be too tolerant.
However, I don't think he can be entirely
inflexible. He can't be a martinet.
I certainly believe one hundred percent you
stimulate people to greater accomplishments by
encouragement, not punishment. But you cannot
achieve anything at all in the way of improved
performance by any form of punishment.
And I believe that a person, that a leader can help a
person to develop by observing and encouraging
him in what he does best.
Everybody likes to excel in something and gain
recognition for it. At all times I've tried to fit
square pegs into square holes. where we could all
be real pleased with what was accomplished. Now
let's say that the Corps asked you to come over and
give a talk to these eighteen, nineteen year old
young men on how to become a leader. What would you
say? Well, I had a talk like that prepared one time.
Oh you did? staff or somebody that was scheduled to
give the commission an exercise was held up by
weather some place. I don't know where it is now. Do
you remember what you said? No, well I didn't ever
have to make it because the weather cleared up and
the man did get here, but I was on alert to give the
commission an exercise.
Well, I would say that
certain attributes that they must have to achieve
leadership roles would be to be dedicated, to set
the example themselves for the followers,
to demand high standards, and to
be generous with recognition for subordinates.
that the leader must be somewhat self-effacing.
If people believe they're being exploited for the
benefit of the leader, that is certainly a turn
off. I believe that the leader must be honest and
forthright
and genuine. If there is a ever any suspicion of
hypocrisy. This is definitely a turn off for
people.
Then I think I believe I said earlier that the
person must know his own goals and objectives and
what it takes to achieve those goals based upon
experience and observation of others.
Those are some of the characteristics. The Army
does have excellent courses on leadership. One of
the best guys I know of to teach it is Dr. Lannis Hope
right here in our Department of Educational
Psychology. He and I organized a leadership
school for our engineer brigade. We asked people
to select one person out of each company in the
brigade and we put on a leadership course. for
years, so he's excellent on psychology and
leadership.
We did use psychological principles at the time.
We were fascinated with Maslow's hierarchy of
satisfaction, what gives satisfaction to
people. I think that's been modified somewhat.
I believe I could give them a lecture on leadership
based on my experience.
That might seem logical to them. Now, as a very last
topic, there is a number of very important changes
in the 1960s here on this campus, as you're well
aware of and as you partook in, as a matter of fact.
And as a former student, I'd like to ask you what you
thought of them. Could you tell us about your role
with the women and the blacks and General Rudder
and to the Mandatory Corps? Could you tell us about
your ideas on that and your role? Certainly.
I was privileged to be appointed to a three-person
committee by General Rudder. a committee that was
chaired by Dr. Archie Flowers and the Veterinary
Public Health Department to consider carefully
the matter of enrollment of women in Texas A&M and
of compulsory core.
We did a rather thorough study of it and I'm very
proud of the fact that the admission of women
proceeded exactly according to the way we
recommended that is first that the wives of
students and daughters of faculty members be
admitted and that females be admitted to those
courses that were unique at Texas A&M in all of
Texas such as in their medicine if they were
otherwise qualified.
We recommended against the mandatory core
because that was military had declined in
popularity and we saw that as a handicap to improve
stature of Texas A&M University appeal to the
general, highly qualified student.
So of course Those things were also considered by
the century study recommendations by a group of
100 highly selected people around the state who
served with General Rutter in determining
what Texas A&M should be like in 1976.
That was one of the finest activities shaping the
future of Texas A&M I think that ever has occurred.
As a matter of fact, most of the gold were exceeded
prior to the, I don't know, somewhere between 10
and 15 years. I don't remember seeing me like that.
It was early 60's when the study was made.
I have been very inspired by the popularity and
progress of Texas A&M University since that time.
Now as a corpsman, was it difficult for you to
advise against mandatory corps? Not at all. Based
upon appraisal of the situation, based upon the
realization that the corps could be preserved on a
voluntary basis, and be even more professional
than it was during the time when it was compulsory.
I had thought that we could go both directions with
the increased enrollment. I believe that the
Corps of Cadets right now is good or better than it
ever has been in the history of Texas A&M. I'm
certain that it's much better than it was in my
time. So we can have both aspects. have a very fine
Corps of Cadets in military uniform to maintain
the traditions of Texas A&M, and we can have a very
fine student body outside the Corps of Cadets. Why
do you think the Corps is better? I've heard others
say that the Corps is not as good as it was in the
1930s. Why do you feel it's better? Well, I know
that the people are better educated. They're
better prepared. They're better led. They have a
lot more resources. There is an opportunity for
many more leaders. The organizations are
smaller. They must have three or four times as many
active army or active military officers here.
They have much more variety in what they can
select, Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines.
I believe that their standards of performance in
things that you can see, such as their reviews, are
better. Their appearance is better. Their
uniforms are better. I just don't know any way
where I think they are better than they were in my
day. What about camaraderie?
I'm not 100% prepared to say about that, but I
believe it has to be fully as good, if not better,
because there is no compulsion. People that don't
like it can get out anytime they want to. So I'd have
to say that the ones that stay in there must like it.
They must be inspired by the camaraderie and
association. Do I have to say that better than it
was? Now I've been at other institutions that are
trying to maintain their size, but not grow too
fast, just sort of stay fairly steady at 15,000 or
20,000 students. And Texas A&M goes from about
6,000 to 7,000 students in 1970 to 31,000 in 1960.
to 31,000 in 1980 had done increases perhaps five
times.
Why do we have such a growth orientation here at
A&M, where at other schools they don't want to grow
too fast, at many other schools?
Well, Texas A&M and its role in school has been one
of those institutions, one of really two
institutions in the past that were selected for
excellence. University of Texas and Texas A&M.
University of Texas has long had a high
enrollment. The funding of the university is
based
standard allocation of funds.
So the more students we have, the more student
credit hours we have, the more funds we qualify
for, the greater our influence in a former
student's organization in all aspects of the
state.
And I think that prior to the time that we became
quite popular, that many, many of the farmer
students were so dedicated to trying to recruit
people to come to Texas A&M. We could hardly
believe it when it did get popular. We got
practically overwhelmed with students.
I presume that these are reasons that Texas A&M has
wanted to earn and be accorded the kind of
recognition they have both for the depth and the
size of their contributions and endeavors.
not everybody is interested in the size of the
university.
There are many who would prefer to see it half as
large as it is now,
when life might have been a little less demanding
on them.
What's your opinion of another general, Earl
Rudder?
Well, I was privileged to serve with Errol Rudder,
both in the military and in the civilian.
Errol Rudder was one of those people, quite like
Patton, that had a certain charisma, that had the
characteristics that I have described of a
leader. A time-tested man, battle-tested,
Started out from a handicapped position when he
was placed
on active duty at captain level and required to
perform against those that had much better
training and experience to carry out the job. In
spite of all these handicaps, he did excel. an
honest-to-God legitimate war hero for his
leadership of his Ranger Battalion at Pointe du
Haut in France,
a man who
gave me a tremendous amount of encouragement. And
I'd have to say that one of the fine emotional
experiences I had is when Mrs. Earl Rudder
presented me a set of his stars that I got to wear.
So he's a man I respected greatly and loved. He gave
me the sort of inspiration that I said I think
should be given to subordinates. Recognition,
demanding, fair,
always wanted the person to be a little more
ambitious. my experience with him. Like many
other, practically every prominent man, I'm sure
there were some who were detractors, all right,
who might have blamed him. He judged harshly
sometimes. If you fell out of favor with him, you'd
had it, sort of.